doc/graph_tutorial.rst, before:

.. _forgi_graph_tutorial:

RNA Secondary Structure as a Graph Using the forgi Library
==============
A Simple Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
forgi is a library for manipulating RNA as a graph-like structure. It provides classes for reading, storing, manipulating and outputting RNA structures. It's use is perhaps best illustrated with an example.


Let's take an RNA sequence:

``CGCUUCAUAUAAUCCUAAUGAUAUGGUUUGGGAGUUUCUACCAAGAGCCUUAAACUCUUGAUUAUGAAGUG``

We can predict its secondary structure using one of a number of tools, including the Vienna RNA Package's RNAfold program:

http://rna.tbi.univie.ac.at/cgi-bin/RNAfold.cgi

This will return a minimum free energy structure which can be represented using dot-bracket notation:

``(((((((((...((((((.........))))))........((((((.......))))))..)))))))))``

This notation corresponds to a structure containing the base pairs shown in the following figure:

.. image:: 1y26_ss.png
    :width: 260
    :height: 260
    :align: center


Evident in this image are six structural elements.

 * 3 stems
 * 2 hairpin loops
 * 1 multiloop

The multiloop itself can be divided into three unpaired sections of nucleotides. Each of these elements is connected to certain other elements. For example, the stem at the top is connected to two unpaired regions of the multi-loop. Both of the hairpin loops are connected one stem each. If we abstract away the sequence information, we can imagine the structure as being represented by a graph.

The forgi package can be used to do just this by using the dotbracket_to_bulge_graph.py script::

    [pkerp@plastilin forgi]$ python examples/dotbracket_to_bulge_graph.py examples/input/1y26_ss.dotbracket
    name untitled
    length 71
    define m2 34 41
    define h1 48 54
    define s2 42 47 55 60
    define s1 13 18 28 33
    define s0 1 9 63 71
    define m1 10 12
    define h0 19 27
    define m0 61 62
    connect s2 h1 m0 m2
    connect s1 h0 m1 m2
    connect s0 m1 m0


The result is an adjacency list of all the elements. The stems are defined with names starting with 's', hairpins with an 'h', multiloops with an 'm', interior loops with an 'i', five-prime unpaired regions with an 'f' and three-prime unpaired regions with a 't'. The numbers indicate the nucleotides that are present in each element. So the stem s0 is composed of nucleotides 1 to 9 on one strand and 63 to 71 on the other. The other elements are described in a similar manner. The hairpin *h0* includs the nucleotides 19 to 27.

In this case it is difficult to picture which section is which from the text representation. To make it easier, another example script will generate a file readable by graphviz. The *neato* program can take that as input and create a nice visualization of the graph::

    [pkerp@plastilin forgi]$ python examples/graph_to_neato.py examples/input/1y26_ss.dotbracket | neato -Tpng -o 1y26_neato.png
    
The result is the following graph representation of the structure.

.. image:: 1y26_neato.png
    :width: 200
    :height: 200
    :align: center
    
Notice the similarity to the original base paired image? The top stem can be identified as *s0*. The two hairpin loops are *b0* and *b1*. The regions in the multiloop are given their own names. *f1* and *t1* should correspond to the 5' and 3' unpaired regions. In this case, the structure lacks these regions so the nodes in the graph are just place-holders. 

Getting a Condensed Representation of the Element Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Mapping nucleotide positions to secondary structure element types (stems, hairpins, multiloops) is easily done using an example script::

    [pkerp@plastilin forgi]$ python examples/dotbracket_to_element_string.py -s examples/input/1y26_ss.dotbracket
    (((((((((...((((((.........))))))........((((((.......))))))..)))))))))
    sssssssssmmmsssssshhhhhhhhhssssssmmmmmmmmsssssshhhhhhhssssssmmsssssssss

In this example, one can clearly see that the paired regions are stems. Some multiloops are present as well as two hairpin regions. The -s option was used to print out the dotbracket representation as well as the element type representation. Omitting it will only output the latter line.

Another Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Here's an example with a longer sequence.


Let's take an RNA sequence:

``GAAUUGCGGGAAAGGGGUCAACAGCCGUUCAGUACCAAGUCUCAGGGGAAACUUUGAGAUGGCCUUGCAAAGGGUAUGGUAAUAAGCUGACGGACAUGGUCCUAACCACGCAGCCAAGUCCUAAGUCAACAGAUCUUCUGUUGAUAUGGAUGCAGUUC``

With a secondary structure:

``....((((((....((.......((((.((((.(((...(((((..........)))))...((.......))....)))......))))))))......))...)).))))......(((....((((((((...))))))))...)))........``

Which looks like this:

.. image:: 1gid_ss.png
    :width: 360
    :height: 360
    :align: center

Can be transformed using the command:

``python examples/graph_to_neato.py examples/input/1gid_ss.dotbracket | neato -Tpng -o 1gid_neato.png``

Into a graph that looks like this:

.. image:: 1gid_neato.png
    :width: 500
    :height: 500
    :align: center

Note that the graph and the secondary structure representation are oriented differently. The multiloop at the top of the graph is at the bottom of the secondary structure. Furthermore, some of the small bulges clearly visible in the graph (as yellow nodes) are hard to see in the secondary structure although they are indeed present.

Loading a Structure from a Dot-Bracket String:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A pseudoknot-free secondary structure can be represented a sequence of dots and
brackets where the dots represent unpaired bases and the matching brackets
represent base pairs. This representation is often delivered as the output of
secondary structure prediction tools such as `RNAfold`_ and `Mfold`_. It can also be used as input to create a skeleton graph in `forgi`::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph()
    >>> bg.from_dotbracket('((..))..((..))')
    >>> print bg.to_bg_string()
    name untitled
    length 14
    seq_ids
    define h1 11 12
    define s1 9 10 13 14
    define s0 1 2 5 6
    define m0 7 8
    define h0 3 4
    connect s1 h1 m0
    connect s0 h0 m0

.. _RNAfold: http://rna.tbi.univie.ac.at/cgi-bin/RNAfold.cgi
.. _mFold: http://mfold.rna.albany.edu/?q=mfold

Loading a Structure from a BPSEQ Formatted File:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A bpseq-formatted file stores the sequence and base-pair content of an RNA secondary structure using one line for each nucleotide in the sequence. Each line has three columns, the index of the nucleotide being described, it's identity (A, C, G, or U) and the index of its pairing partner (0 if none). We can load this file and create graph structure from it using the `from_bpseq_str` function::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph()
    >>> bpstr="""1 A 0                                                                                                 
    ... 2 A 12 
    ... 3 A 11
    ... 4 A 9
    ... 5 A 8
    ... 6 A 0
    ... 7 A 0 
    ... 8 A 5
    ... 9 A 4
    ... 10 A 0
    ... 11 A 3
    ... 12 A 2
    ... 13 A 0
    ... 14 A 0
    ... 15 A 20
    ... 16 A 19
    ... 17 A 0
    ... 18 A 0
    ... 19 A 16
    ... 20 A 15
    ... 21 A 0
    ... """
    >>> 
    >>> bg.from_bpseq_str(bpstr)                                                                                       
    >>> print bg.to_bg_string()
    name untitled
    length 21
    seq AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
    seq_ids 
    define f1 1 1
    define i0 10 10
    define h1 17 18
    define s2 15 16 19 20
    define s1 4 5 8 9
    define s0 2 3 11 12
    define t1 21 21
    define h0 6 7
    define m0 13 14
    connect s2 h1 m0 t1
    connect s1 i0 h0
    connect s0 f1 m0 i0



Finding the Partner of a Base Pair
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Consider the situation where we have a secondary structure and we want to know the base-pairing partner of nucleotide *n*. This is easily done with forgi::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as cgb
    >>> bg = cgb.BulgeGraph()
    >>> bg.from_dotbracket('(((((((((...((((((.........))))))........((((((.......))))))..)))))))))')
    >>> bg.pairing_partner(1)
    71
    >>> bg.pairing_partner(13)
    33


Finding the Length of the Longest Stem
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For whatever reason, one may be interested in finding out how long the longest stem in a secondary structure is. Initially, one may assume that this can easily be done by searching for the longest string of '(' or ')' in the dot-bracket file. Unfortunately, structures with an interior loop which has an unpaired base on only one strand will lead to an erronous result in this example. The decomposition provided by forgi will, however, take this into account in enumerating the structural elements. It then becomes a matter of iterating over the stems and checking their lengths::

    bg = cgb.BulgeGraph()
    bg.from_dotbracket(brackets)
    biggest_stem = (-1, 'x')
    for s in bg.stem_iterator():
        if bg.stem_length(s) > biggest_stem[0]: 
            biggest_stem = (bg.stem_length(s), s)

This is best illustrated with two examples::

    echo '..((((..))))..' | python examples/longest_stem.py -
    4
    echo '..((((..).)))..' | python examples/longest_stem.py -
    3

In the first case, the longest stem is the only stem. In the second case, what appears to be one large stem of length 4, is actually two stems of length 1 and 3.

Iterating Over the Nucleotides of an Interior Loop
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Imagine that we have a model of an RNA structure, and we want to list all of the nucleotides which are in interior loop regions. This is can be done by combining an iterator which yields all of the interior loops and another iterator which iterates over the nucleotides within a particular element::

    >>> import sys
    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as cgb
    >>> bg = cgb.BulgeGraph()
    >>> bg.from_dotbracket("((..((..))..))..((..((..))..))")
    >>> for iloop in bg.iloop_iterator():
    ...     for rn in bg.define_residue_num_iterator(iloop):
    ...             sys.stdout.write(str(rn) + " ")
    ... 
    10 11 12 13 2 3 4 5 26 27 28 29 18 19 20 21

Rosetta rna_denovo Constraint File Creation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `Rosetta <http://www.rosettacommons.org/>`_ protein structure prediction package provides a program for RNA 3D structure prediction called `rna_denovo <http://www.rosettacommons.org/manuals/rosetta3.3_user_guide/d2/d82/rna_denovo.html>`_. To specify the secondary structure of an RNA molecule, one needs to pass in a parameter file indicating which nucleotides are paired. 

Given an dot-bracket sequence as input, forgi can be easily be used to generate the parameter file for rna_denovo.Using the secondary structure of 1y26 (shown in the first example) one can run the appropriate example:

``python examples/dotbracket_to_rosetta_constraints.py examples/1y26_ss.dotbracket``

And get an appropriately formatted parameter file::

    STEM PAIR 42 60
    STEM PAIR 43 59
    STEM PAIR 44 58
    STEM PAIR 45 57
    STEM PAIR 46 56
    STEM PAIR 47 55
    STEM PAIR 13 33
    STEM PAIR 14 32
    STEM PAIR 15 31
    STEM PAIR 16 30
    STEM PAIR 17 29
    STEM PAIR 18 28
    STEM PAIR 19 27
    STEM PAIR 1 71
    STEM PAIR 2 70
    STEM PAIR 3 69
    STEM PAIR 4 68
    STEM PAIR 5 67
    STEM PAIR 6 66
    STEM PAIR 7 65
    STEM PAIR 8 64
    STEM PAIR 9 63

Getting the sequence of an element and its neighbors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Suppose we want to find out not only the sequence of an element, but also the elements that surround it? This is easily done using the `get_flanking_sequence` function. To illustrate, let's create a graph from a fasta representation::

    import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb

    bg = fgb.BulgeGraph()

    fa = """>blah
    AAAACCGGGCCUUUUACCCCAAAUUGGAA
    ((((..(((..)))..))))...((..))
    """
    bg.from_fasta(fa)

From the structure, we can see that there are two hairpins (`h0` and `h1`), one interior loop (`i0`) and one multiloop (`m0`). We can get the sequence for `h0` and it's neighboring node (`s0`) like so::

    >>> bg.get_flanking_sequence('h0')
    'GGGCCUUU'
<<<<<<< HEAD

The same can be done for the multiloop (`m0`)::

    >>> bg.get_flanking_sequence('m0')
    'CCCCAAAUU'

The interior loop is a little more tricky because it is double stranded. From the interior loop, we need to pass in a parameter indicating which side we want (0 or 1). The 0'th strand corresponds to the one with the lower numbered nucleotides, whereas the 1'st strand is the other. The default is the 0'th strand::

    >>> bg.get_flanking_sequence('i0')
    'AAAACCGGG'
    >>> bg.get_flanking_sequence('i0', side=1)
    'UUUUACCCC'
=======

The same can be done for the multiloop (`m0`)::

    >>> bg.get_flanking_sequence('m0')
    'CCCCAAAUU'

The interior loop is a little more tricky because it is double stranded. From the interior loop, we need to pass in a parameter indicating which side we want (0 or 1). The 0'th strand corresponds to the one with the lower numbered nucleotides, whereas the 1'st strand is the other. The default is the 0'th strand::

    >>> bg.get_flanking_sequence('i0')
    'AAAACCGGG'
    >>> bg.get_flanking_sequence('i0', side=1)
    'UUUUACCCC'

Finding the Minimum Spanning Tree of a Graph
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Can we create a subgraph such that all stems are connected and no cycles remain? Recall that cycles only occur in multiloop sections (junctions). Can we return a representation of the structure such that all stems are connected with the least number of nucleotides between them? If interior loops and multiloop segements were considered edges, then this would be the equivalent of a minimum spanning tree. Since they are nodes, then the result is not a minimum spanning tree but simply a representation of the secondary structure with broken multiloops.

As an example, consider the following structure:

.. image:: mst_init.png
    :width: 200
    :align: center

.. python examples/graph_to_neato.py -c "((..((.)).(.).))" | neato -Tpng -o doc/mst_init.png

To break the cycle, we would like to remove the segment 'm0'. This is easily done using the `get_mst()` function of the `BulgeGraph` data structure::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb 
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph(dotbracket_str="((..((.)).(.).))")
    >>> bg.get_mst()
    set(['s2', 's1', 's0', 'm1', 'm2'])

The result contains all the nodes except the ones removed to break the cycles. The implementation uses a slightly modified version of Kruskal's algorithm.

Finding the elements which form the multiloops of a structure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `find_multiloop_loops()` function returns a list of sets where each set contains the elements that are part of a particular junction. 


.. image:: find_loops.png
    :width: 290
    :align: center

.. python examples/graph_to_neato.py -c "(.(.(.(.).(.).).(.).))" | neato -Tpng -o doc/mst_init.png
Example::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph(dotbracket_str='(.(.(.(.).(.).).(.).))')
    >>> print bg.find_multiloop_loops()
    [set(['s3', 's2', 's4', 'm5', 'm3', 'm2']), set(['s2', 's1', 's5', 'm4', 'm1', 'm0'])]

Selecting a Random Subgraph
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `random_subgraph` function picks a random quantity of elements which will become part of the subgraph. A random element is chosen as a starting point and the graph is traversed in a random manner until at least the chosen number of nodes have been added. When that number is exceeded, the traversal stops. In cases where an interior loop or a multiloop segment is added, the stem on the other end is automatically added as well. Example, using the graph in the previous section::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph(dotbracket_str='(.(.(.(.).(.).).(.).))')
    >>> sg = bg.random_subgraph(5)
    >>> print sg
    ['s3', 's2', 'm2', 's4', 'm5']

From this we can create a new graph, compete with defines and connections. Only the sequence and its related information (length, ids) will not be carried over::

    >>> nbg = fgb.bg_from_subgraph(bg, sg)
    >>> print nbg.to_bg_string()
    name untitled
    length 0
    seq_ids
    define s3 7 7 9 9
    define s2 5 5 15 15
    define s4 11 11 13 13
    define m5 10 10
    define m2 6 6
    connect s3 m5 m2
    connect s2 m2
    connect s4 m5

Which, when visualized, looks like this:

.. image:: subgraph.png
    :height: 200
    :align: center

Iterating Over The List of Elements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To iterate over each stem in the structure, use the `stem_iterator()` function::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph(dotbracket_str='((..((..))..))..((..((..))...)).')
    >>> print list(bg.stem_iterator())
    ['s3', 's2', 's1', 's0']

To iterate over each interior loop in the structures, use the `iloop_iterator()`::

    >>> print list(bg.iloop_iterator())
    ['i1', 'i0']

For multiloops, hairpin loops, fiveprime regions and threeprimes regions  use `mloop_iterator()`, `hloop_iterator()`, `floop_iterator` and `tloop_iterator`, respectively::

    >>> print list(bg.mloop_iterator())
    ['m0']
    >>> print list(bg.hloop_iterator())
    ['h1', 'h0']
    >>> print list(bg.floop_iterator())
    []
    >>> print list(bg.tloop_iterator())
    ['t1']

Notice that `floop_iterator()` doesn't yield any values. This is because there is no 3' unpaired region in this structure.

Dissolving Stems
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To remove a stem from the skeleton graph, use the ``dissolve_stem()`` member function. This will remove the base pairs that were part of the stem and merge them with the adjacent unpaired regions::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph(dotbracket_str='((..))..((..))')
    >>> bg.dissolve_stem('s0')
    >>> print bg.to_dotbracket_string()
    ........((..))
    >>> bg.dissolve_stem('s1')
    >>> print bg.to_dotbracket_string()
    ..............

Commit message:

Added a tutorial section about the stem sides

doc/graph_tutorial.rst, after:

.. _forgi_graph_tutorial:

RNA Secondary Structure as a Graph Using the forgi Library
==============
A Simple Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
forgi is a library for manipulating RNA as a graph-like structure. It provides classes for reading, storing, manipulating and outputting RNA structures. It's use is perhaps best illustrated with an example.


Let's take an RNA sequence:

``CGCUUCAUAUAAUCCUAAUGAUAUGGUUUGGGAGUUUCUACCAAGAGCCUUAAACUCUUGAUUAUGAAGUG``

We can predict its secondary structure using one of a number of tools, including the Vienna RNA Package's RNAfold program:

http://rna.tbi.univie.ac.at/cgi-bin/RNAfold.cgi

This will return a minimum free energy structure which can be represented using dot-bracket notation:

``(((((((((...((((((.........))))))........((((((.......))))))..)))))))))``

This notation corresponds to a structure containing the base pairs shown in the following figure:

.. image:: 1y26_ss.png
    :width: 260
    :height: 260
    :align: center


Evident in this image are six structural elements.

 * 3 stems
 * 2 hairpin loops
 * 1 multiloop

The multiloop itself can be divided into three unpaired sections of nucleotides. Each of these elements is connected to certain other elements. For example, the stem at the top is connected to two unpaired regions of the multi-loop. Both of the hairpin loops are connected one stem each. If we abstract away the sequence information, we can imagine the structure as being represented by a graph.

The forgi package can be used to do just this by using the dotbracket_to_bulge_graph.py script::

    [pkerp@plastilin forgi]$ python examples/dotbracket_to_bulge_graph.py examples/input/1y26_ss.dotbracket
    name untitled
    length 71
    define m2 34 41
    define h1 48 54
    define s2 42 47 55 60
    define s1 13 18 28 33
    define s0 1 9 63 71
    define m1 10 12
    define h0 19 27
    define m0 61 62
    connect s2 h1 m0 m2
    connect s1 h0 m1 m2
    connect s0 m1 m0


The result is an adjacency list of all the elements. The stems are defined with names starting with 's', hairpins with an 'h', multiloops with an 'm', interior loops with an 'i', five-prime unpaired regions with an 'f' and three-prime unpaired regions with a 't'. The numbers indicate the nucleotides that are present in each element. So the stem s0 is composed of nucleotides 1 to 9 on one strand and 63 to 71 on the other. The other elements are described in a similar manner. The hairpin *h0* includs the nucleotides 19 to 27.

In this case it is difficult to picture which section is which from the text representation. To make it easier, another example script will generate a file readable by graphviz. The *neato* program can take that as input and create a nice visualization of the graph::

    [pkerp@plastilin forgi]$ python examples/graph_to_neato.py examples/input/1y26_ss.dotbracket | neato -Tpng -o 1y26_neato.png
    
The result is the following graph representation of the structure.

.. image:: 1y26_neato.png
    :width: 200
    :height: 200
    :align: center
    
Notice the similarity to the original base paired image? The top stem can be identified as *s0*. The two hairpin loops are *b0* and *b1*. The regions in the multiloop are given their own names. *f1* and *t1* should correspond to the 5' and 3' unpaired regions. In this case, the structure lacks these regions so the nodes in the graph are just place-holders. 

Getting a Condensed Representation of the Element Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Mapping nucleotide positions to secondary structure element types (stems, hairpins, multiloops) is easily done using an example script::

    [pkerp@plastilin forgi]$ python examples/dotbracket_to_element_string.py -s examples/input/1y26_ss.dotbracket
    (((((((((...((((((.........))))))........((((((.......))))))..)))))))))
    sssssssssmmmsssssshhhhhhhhhssssssmmmmmmmmsssssshhhhhhhssssssmmsssssssss

In this example, one can clearly see that the paired regions are stems. Some multiloops are present as well as two hairpin regions. The -s option was used to print out the dotbracket representation as well as the element type representation. Omitting it will only output the latter line.

Another Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Here's an example with a longer sequence.


Let's take an RNA sequence:

``GAAUUGCGGGAAAGGGGUCAACAGCCGUUCAGUACCAAGUCUCAGGGGAAACUUUGAGAUGGCCUUGCAAAGGGUAUGGUAAUAAGCUGACGGACAUGGUCCUAACCACGCAGCCAAGUCCUAAGUCAACAGAUCUUCUGUUGAUAUGGAUGCAGUUC``

With a secondary structure:

``....((((((....((.......((((.((((.(((...(((((..........)))))...((.......))....)))......))))))))......))...)).))))......(((....((((((((...))))))))...)))........``

Which looks like this:

.. image:: 1gid_ss.png
    :width: 360
    :height: 360
    :align: center

Can be transformed using the command:

``python examples/graph_to_neato.py examples/input/1gid_ss.dotbracket | neato -Tpng -o 1gid_neato.png``

Into a graph that looks like this:

.. image:: 1gid_neato.png
    :width: 500
    :height: 500
    :align: center

Note that the graph and the secondary structure representation are oriented differently. The multiloop at the top of the graph is at the bottom of the secondary structure. Furthermore, some of the small bulges clearly visible in the graph (as yellow nodes) are hard to see in the secondary structure although they are indeed present.

Loading a Structure from a Dot-Bracket String:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A pseudoknot-free secondary structure can be represented a sequence of dots and
brackets where the dots represent unpaired bases and the matching brackets
represent base pairs. This representation is often delivered as the output of
secondary structure prediction tools such as `RNAfold`_ and `Mfold`_. It can also be used as input to create a skeleton graph in `forgi`::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph()
    >>> bg.from_dotbracket('((..))..((..))')
    >>> print bg.to_bg_string()
    name untitled
    length 14
    seq_ids
    define h1 11 12
    define s1 9 10 13 14
    define s0 1 2 5 6
    define m0 7 8
    define h0 3 4
    connect s1 h1 m0
    connect s0 h0 m0

.. _RNAfold: http://rna.tbi.univie.ac.at/cgi-bin/RNAfold.cgi
.. _mFold: http://mfold.rna.albany.edu/?q=mfold

Loading a Structure from a BPSEQ Formatted File:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A bpseq-formatted file stores the sequence and base-pair content of an RNA secondary structure using one line for each nucleotide in the sequence. Each line has three columns, the index of the nucleotide being described, it's identity (A, C, G, or U) and the index of its pairing partner (0 if none). We can load this file and create graph structure from it using the `from_bpseq_str` function::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph()
    >>> bpstr="""1 A 0                                                                                                 
    ... 2 A 12 
    ... 3 A 11
    ... 4 A 9
    ... 5 A 8
    ... 6 A 0
    ... 7 A 0 
    ... 8 A 5
    ... 9 A 4
    ... 10 A 0
    ... 11 A 3
    ... 12 A 2
    ... 13 A 0
    ... 14 A 0
    ... 15 A 20
    ... 16 A 19
    ... 17 A 0
    ... 18 A 0
    ... 19 A 16
    ... 20 A 15
    ... 21 A 0
    ... """
    >>> 
    >>> bg.from_bpseq_str(bpstr)                                                                                       
    >>> print bg.to_bg_string()
    name untitled
    length 21
    seq AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
    seq_ids 
    define f1 1 1
    define i0 10 10
    define h1 17 18
    define s2 15 16 19 20
    define s1 4 5 8 9
    define s0 2 3 11 12
    define t1 21 21
    define h0 6 7
    define m0 13 14
    connect s2 h1 m0 t1
    connect s1 i0 h0
    connect s0 f1 m0 i0



Finding the Partner of a Base Pair
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Consider the situation where we have a secondary structure and we want to know the base-pairing partner of nucleotide *n*. This is easily done with forgi::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as cgb
    >>> bg = cgb.BulgeGraph()
    >>> bg.from_dotbracket('(((((((((...((((((.........))))))........((((((.......))))))..)))))))))')
    >>> bg.pairing_partner(1)
    71
    >>> bg.pairing_partner(13)
    33


Finding the Length of the Longest Stem
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For whatever reason, one may be interested in finding out how long the longest stem in a secondary structure is. Initially, one may assume that this can easily be done by searching for the longest string of '(' or ')' in the dot-bracket file. Unfortunately, structures with an interior loop which has an unpaired base on only one strand will lead to an erronous result in this example. The decomposition provided by forgi will, however, take this into account in enumerating the structural elements. It then becomes a matter of iterating over the stems and checking their lengths::

    bg = cgb.BulgeGraph()
    bg.from_dotbracket(brackets)
    biggest_stem = (-1, 'x')
    for s in bg.stem_iterator():
        if bg.stem_length(s) > biggest_stem[0]: 
            biggest_stem = (bg.stem_length(s), s)

This is best illustrated with two examples::

    echo '..((((..))))..' | python examples/longest_stem.py -
    4
    echo '..((((..).)))..' | python examples/longest_stem.py -
    3

In the first case, the longest stem is the only stem. In the second case, what appears to be one large stem of length 4, is actually two stems of length 1 and 3.

Iterating Over the Nucleotides of an Interior Loop
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Imagine that we have a model of an RNA structure, and we want to list all of the nucleotides which are in interior loop regions. This is can be done by combining an iterator which yields all of the interior loops and another iterator which iterates over the nucleotides within a particular element::

    >>> import sys
    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as cgb
    >>> bg = cgb.BulgeGraph()
    >>> bg.from_dotbracket("((..((..))..))..((..((..))..))")
    >>> for iloop in bg.iloop_iterator():
    ...     for rn in bg.define_residue_num_iterator(iloop):
    ...             sys.stdout.write(str(rn) + " ")
    ... 
    10 11 12 13 2 3 4 5 26 27 28 29 18 19 20 21

Rosetta rna_denovo Constraint File Creation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `Rosetta <http://www.rosettacommons.org/>`_ protein structure prediction package provides a program for RNA 3D structure prediction called `rna_denovo <http://www.rosettacommons.org/manuals/rosetta3.3_user_guide/d2/d82/rna_denovo.html>`_. To specify the secondary structure of an RNA molecule, one needs to pass in a parameter file indicating which nucleotides are paired. 

Given an dot-bracket sequence as input, forgi can be easily be used to generate the parameter file for rna_denovo.Using the secondary structure of 1y26 (shown in the first example) one can run the appropriate example:

``python examples/dotbracket_to_rosetta_constraints.py examples/1y26_ss.dotbracket``

And get an appropriately formatted parameter file::

    STEM PAIR 42 60
    STEM PAIR 43 59
    STEM PAIR 44 58
    STEM PAIR 45 57
    STEM PAIR 46 56
    STEM PAIR 47 55
    STEM PAIR 13 33
    STEM PAIR 14 32
    STEM PAIR 15 31
    STEM PAIR 16 30
    STEM PAIR 17 29
    STEM PAIR 18 28
    STEM PAIR 19 27
    STEM PAIR 1 71
    STEM PAIR 2 70
    STEM PAIR 3 69
    STEM PAIR 4 68
    STEM PAIR 5 67
    STEM PAIR 6 66
    STEM PAIR 7 65
    STEM PAIR 8 64
    STEM PAIR 9 63

Getting the Sequence of an Element and its Neighbors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Suppose we want to find out not only the sequence of an element, but also the elements that surround it? This is easily done using the `get_flanking_sequence` function. To illustrate, let's create a graph from a fasta representation::

    import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb

    bg = fgb.BulgeGraph()

    fa = """>blah
    AAAACCGGGCCUUUUACCCCAAAUUGGAA
    ((((..(((..)))..))))...((..))
    """
    bg.from_fasta(fa)

From the structure, we can see that there are two hairpins (`h0` and `h1`), one interior loop (`i0`) and one multiloop (`m0`). We can get the sequence for `h0` and it's neighboring node (`s0`) like so::

    >>> bg.get_flanking_sequence('h0')
    'GGGCCUUU'
<<<<<<< HEAD

The same can be done for the multiloop (`m0`)::

    >>> bg.get_flanking_sequence('m0')
    'CCCCAAAUU'

The interior loop is a little more tricky because it is double stranded. From the interior loop, we need to pass in a parameter indicating which side we want (0 or 1). The 0'th strand corresponds to the one with the lower numbered nucleotides, whereas the 1'st strand is the other. The default is the 0'th strand::

    >>> bg.get_flanking_sequence('i0')
    'AAAACCGGG'
    >>> bg.get_flanking_sequence('i0', side=1)
    'UUUUACCCC'
=======

The same can be done for the multiloop (`m0`)::

    >>> bg.get_flanking_sequence('m0')
    'CCCCAAAUU'

The interior loop is a little more tricky because it is double stranded. From the interior loop, we need to pass in a parameter indicating which side we want (0 or 1). The 0'th strand corresponds to the one with the lower numbered nucleotides, whereas the 1'st strand is the other. The default is the 0'th strand::

    >>> bg.get_flanking_sequence('i0')
    'AAAACCGGG'
    >>> bg.get_flanking_sequence('i0', side=1)
    'UUUUACCCC'

Finding the Minimum Spanning Tree of a Graph
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Can we create a subgraph such that all stems are connected and no cycles remain? Recall that cycles only occur in multiloop sections (junctions). Can we return a representation of the structure such that all stems are connected with the least number of nucleotides between them? If interior loops and multiloop segements were considered edges, then this would be the equivalent of a minimum spanning tree. Since they are nodes, then the result is not a minimum spanning tree but simply a representation of the secondary structure with broken multiloops.

As an example, consider the following structure:

.. image:: mst_init.png
    :width: 200
    :align: center

.. python examples/graph_to_neato.py -c "((..((.)).(.).))" | neato -Tpng -o doc/mst_init.png

To break the cycle, we would like to remove the segment 'm0'. This is easily done using the `get_mst()` function of the `BulgeGraph` data structure::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb 
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph(dotbracket_str="((..((.)).(.).))")
    >>> bg.get_mst()
    set(['s2', 's1', 's0', 'm1', 'm2'])

The result contains all the nodes except the ones removed to break the cycles. The implementation uses a slightly modified version of Kruskal's algorithm.

Finding the elements which form the multiloops of a structure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `find_multiloop_loops()` function returns a list of sets where each set contains the elements that are part of a particular junction. 


.. image:: find_loops.png
    :width: 290
    :align: center

.. python examples/graph_to_neato.py -c "(.(.(.(.).(.).).(.).))" | neato -Tpng -o doc/mst_init.png
Example::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph(dotbracket_str='(.(.(.(.).(.).).(.).))')
    >>> print bg.find_multiloop_loops()
    [set(['s3', 's2', 's4', 'm5', 'm3', 'm2']), set(['s2', 's1', 's5', 'm4', 'm1', 'm0'])]

Selecting a Random Subgraph
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `random_subgraph` function picks a random quantity of elements which will become part of the subgraph. A random element is chosen as a starting point and the graph is traversed in a random manner until at least the chosen number of nodes have been added. When that number is exceeded, the traversal stops. In cases where an interior loop or a multiloop segment is added, the stem on the other end is automatically added as well. Example, using the graph in the previous section::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph(dotbracket_str='(.(.(.(.).(.).).(.).))')
    >>> sg = bg.random_subgraph(5)
    >>> print sg
    ['s3', 's2', 'm2', 's4', 'm5']

From this we can create a new graph, compete with defines and connections. Only the sequence and its related information (length, ids) will not be carried over::

    >>> nbg = fgb.bg_from_subgraph(bg, sg)
    >>> print nbg.to_bg_string()
    name untitled
    length 0
    seq_ids
    define s3 7 7 9 9
    define s2 5 5 15 15
    define s4 11 11 13 13
    define m5 10 10
    define m2 6 6
    connect s3 m5 m2
    connect s2 m2
    connect s4 m5

Which, when visualized, looks like this:

.. image:: subgraph.png
    :height: 200
    :align: center

Iterating Over The List of Elements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To iterate over each stem in the structure, use the `stem_iterator()` function::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph(dotbracket_str='((..((..))..))..((..((..))...)).')
    >>> print list(bg.stem_iterator())
    ['s3', 's2', 's1', 's0']

To iterate over each interior loop in the structures, use the `iloop_iterator()`::

    >>> print list(bg.iloop_iterator())
    ['i1', 'i0']

For multiloops, hairpin loops, fiveprime regions and threeprimes regions  use `mloop_iterator()`, `hloop_iterator()`, `floop_iterator` and `tloop_iterator`, respectively::

    >>> print list(bg.mloop_iterator())
    ['m0']
    >>> print list(bg.hloop_iterator())
    ['h1', 'h0']
    >>> print list(bg.floop_iterator())
    []
    >>> print list(bg.tloop_iterator())
    ['t1']

Notice that `floop_iterator()` doesn't yield any values. This is because there is no 3' unpaired region in this structure.

Dissolving Stems
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To remove a stem from the skeleton graph, use the ``dissolve_stem()`` member function. This will remove the base pairs that were part of the stem and merge them with the adjacent unpaired regions::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph(dotbracket_str='((..))..((..))')
    >>> bg.dissolve_stem('s0')
    >>> print bg.to_dotbracket_string()
    ........((..))
    >>> bg.dissolve_stem('s1')
    >>> print bg.to_dotbracket_string()
    ..............

Finding Out Which Side of a Stem a Loop Is On
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If one imagines a stem as having a direction where its start is the position of
the lowest numbered nucleotide within it, then a loop adjacent to the stem will
be on one side of it. Which side it's on can be elucidated using the
``get_sides`` function::

    >>> import forgi.graph.bulge_graph as fgb
    >>> bg = fgb.BulgeGraph(dotbracket_str="..((..((..))..))..")
    >>> bg.get_sides('s0', 'i0')
    (1, 0)
    >>> bg.get_sides('s1', 'i0')
    (0, 1)

The result shows that the loop `i0` is on side 1 of stem `s0` and side 0 of
stem `s1`. The second number of the tuple is simple the boolean opposite of the
first number. This needs to be changed in a future version.
